JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
Democrats square
off in a contentious debate, as
Republican
candidates jockey for survival
just days before
the New Hampshire primary.
Then: a report from the
epicenter of the Zika
outbreak in Brazil, where
scientists are racing
against time.
And from a new restaurant owner
to a resilient
mother in a muddy camp, the many
lives of
the Syrian refugees now living
in Lebanon.
AMINA HAMADI, Refugee (through
translator):
A mountain can't move me. I have
children
that I have to raise. I need to
look after
them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it's Friday.
Mark Shields
and David Brooks are here, to
analyze the
week's news.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's the final
weekend before
the New Hampshire primary, and
the eyes of
the political world are focused
on the Granite
State. Candidates are dashing
across the state
to win over as many votes as
possible.
Political director Lisa
Desjardins, who is
in Manchester, reports that when
the two remaining
Democrats took center stage
together, they
heated up a cold New England
night.
LISA DESJARDINS: Four days
before the balloting,
the Democratic race is now about
defining
and definitions.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Well, let me start by saying
that Senator
Sanders and I share some very
big progressive
goals.
LISA DESJARDINS: Progressive,
that was Hillary
Clinton's key word from minute
one of last
night's debate, even as Bernie
Sanders tried
to tie her to a different word:
moderate.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
It is what she said, and all
that I said,
there's nothing wrong with being
a moderate.
But you can't be a moderate. You
can't be
a progressive.
LISA DESJARDINS: Sanders
attacked and Clinton
countered.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: But if
we're going
to get into labels, I don't
think it was particularly
progressive to vote against the
Brady Bill
five times.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: I don't
think it was
progressive to vote to give gun
makers and
sellers immunity.
LISA DESJARDINS: Minutes later,
another sharp
exchange over Sanders' repeated
mention of
the speaking fees Clinton
previously collected
from banks.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: There is
this attack
that he is putting forth, which
really comes
down to, you know, anybody who
ever took donations
or speaking fees from any
interest group has
to be bought.
And I just absolutely reject
that, Senator.
So I think it's time to end the
very artful
smear that you and your campaign
have been
carrying out in recent weeks,
and let's talk
-- let's talk about the issues.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: Let's talk
let's talk
about issues, all right? Let's
talk about
why, in the 1990s, Wall Street
got deregulated.
Did it have anything to do with
the fact that
Wall Street provided -- spent
billions of
dollars on lobbying and campaign
contributions?
Well, some people might think,
yes, that had
some influence.
LISA DESJARDINS: Sanders
hammered home a chief
campaign issue for him: that
Wall Street is
hoarding wealth and politicians
have left
it uncontrolled.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: It is not
one street.
Wall Street is an entity of
unbelievable economic
and political power. That's a
fact.
LISA DESJARDINS: Sanders also
launched his
top charge against Clinton.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: Not only
did I vote against
that war. I helped lead the
opposition
LISA DESJARDINS: Raising her
2002 vote that
authorized the Iraq War.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Look, we
did differ.
A vote in 2002 is not a plan to
defeat ISIS.
We have to look at the threats
that we face
right now.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: And we
have to be
prepared to take them on.
LISA DESJARDINS: But that led to
a longer
back-and-forth, where Clinton
sharply questioned
some of Sanders' foreign policy
grasp.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Such as
inviting Iranian
troops into Syria to try to
resolve the conflict
there, putting them right on the
doorstep
of Israel, asking Saudi Arabia
and Iran to
work together, when they can't
stand each
other, and are engaged in a
proxy battle right
at this moment.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: I fully,
fully concede
that Secretary Clinton, who was
secretary
of state for four years, has
more experience.
That is not arguable in foreign
affairs. But
experience is not the only
point. Judgment
is.
LISA DESJARDINS: For all of that
heat during
last night's one-on-one clash,
the major opponent
today in the Granite State was
snow. It slowed
the day's events, but candidates
plowed on.
Jeb Bush was out in Derry today.
And former
first lady Barbara Bush braved
the conditions
as well, touting her son during
a make-or-break
week for him.
BARBARA BUSH, Former First Lady:
Vote for
Jeb.
LISA DESJARDINS: Voters still
came out to
see John Kasich in Hollis for
what was his
99th town hall. His campaign,
like that of
Jeb Bush, hinges on a solid
showing in next
Tuesday's primary. The snow
didn't get in
the way of several women
senators, either.
They joined New Hampshire's
governor in Manchester
today, in a bid to give Clinton,
their former
colleague, a post-debate boost.
Four days to go, and it is
already a blitz,
or, if you will, blizzard here
in New Hampshire.
Even with today's snow, Judy,
candidates held
some 20 events today, like this
one here at
a middle school gym for Marco
Rubio.
One note about this event. The
Rubio campaign
was very happy to tell me that
they originally
scheduled this for the cafeteria
of this school,
but they had more people show up
than they
expected and they moved it to
the gym -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, that's
surprising they
would want to share that
information with
you, Lisa.
LISA DESJARDINS: Imagine.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you have been
to several
candidate events today. What are
the voters
saying to you?
LISA DESJARDINS: When you talk
to New Hampshire
voters who go to these events,
to be honest,
Judy, I feel a lot of them are
still soft.
Most of them seem to be honing
in on their
own private list of two or three
candidates.
And what surprised me, Judy, was
the combination
of candidates. I talked to two
different voters
today who are looking at one
Democrat and
one Republican. For example, a
man I talked
to, former firefighter, thinking
about Bernie
Sanders and Marco Rubio. That's
a combination
that might surprise people, but
he said what
he's looking for is integrity.
And that's a word I heard
throughout. Also
here at this event, those who
are looking
at Rubio, the Republicans, it
does seem like
they're considering Rubio
against Trump or
Rubio against Cruz, but the key
there, Judy,
is that these are voters who say
they weren't
paying that much attention to
Marco Rubio,
say, a month ago. Now they're
here and they
want to see him in person.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, are you
picking up a sense
that Rubio has benefited from
coming in third
in Iowa, a close third to Donald
Trump?
LISA DESJARDINS: I think
absolutely he's benefited.
Now, I don't think he's locked
in those votes
yet, but I think he has people
considering
him who were not before. I also
think Marco
Rubio is benefiting from doubts
about the
other candidates, about the
fight between
Donald Trump and Ted Cruz.
Donald Trump saying
that Ted Cruz doesn't get along
with anyone,
I have heard that from people
here today at
this Rubio event.
On the other hand, Ted Cruz
saying that Donald
Trump is a hothead who can't be
trusted, say,
with the nuclear arsenal, I have
heard that
as well. Rubio seems to be
benefiting from
that fight from the top two.
Now, how that
will end, I don't know. Rubio
obviously has
to prove himself on his own.
Donald Trump
wasn't in the state today, as we
said, because
of the weather, and he is trying
to re-angle
his campaign, Judy, trying to be
-- do more
retail politics than we have
seen before.
So far, his campaign hasn't
proven that they
know quite how to do that, but
they're trying.
If they can pull that off, it
might help him
here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Lisa, is it
thought that
not being in the state today
will matter for
Donald Trump? And, by the way,
both Democrats,
Hillary Clinton and Bernie
Sanders, are going
to be leaving the state for part
of the weekend.
LISA DESJARDINS: Right, the
tightest race
that we have, the Democratic
race, if you
look nationally, both candidates
are taking
time from the campaign trail.
Bernie Sanders, he is going to
be on "Saturday
Night Live" with Larry David. I
think some
of our viewers will be happy to
imagine how
that will go. And then Hillary
Clinton is
going to Flint, Michigan. Those
are two very
different events, but it shows
that both of
these candidates are looking
past New Hampshire,
maybe for different reasons,
Hillary Clinton
knowing she's behind, wanting to
talk to,
perhaps, Flint, Michigan, a
group that could
appeal, to, say, South Carolina,
where there
are a lot of African-American
and sort of
lower-income voters.
Bernie Sanders trying to appeal
more broadly
nationally, where he and Clinton
are the closest.
As for Donald Trump, I do think
New Hampshire
voters notice when a candidate
is not here.
They have noticed. And I think
the Trump campaign
is aware of that.
So, I think we will watch this
weekend and
see if he starts scheduling more
events. Certainly,
the Trump campaign wants to win,
but they're
used to very large speeches. And
they're right
now just retooling for the
retail politics
of New Hampshire.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we know
voters in New
Hampshire and Iowa expect to see
their candidates
and see them often. So, we will
see.
Lisa Desjardins in New Hampshire
for the weekend
through the duration, thank you.
LISA DESJARDINS: My pleasure.
Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news, the
government's latest jobs report
showed hiring
slowed substantially in January
from the month
before. The Labor Department
said U.S. employers
added 151,000 jobs. At the same
time, the
unemployment rate dropped to 4.9
percent last
month. That is its lowest level
in eight years.
And wages, average hourly
earnings, rose significantly.
President Obama hailed the news
this afternoon
at the White House.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
We should be proud of the
progress we have
made. We have recovered from the
worst economic
crisis since the 1930s, the
worst in my lifetime
and the lifetime of most of the
people in
this room, and we have done it
faster, stronger,
better, more durably than just
about any other
advanced economy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The mixed jobs
data sent stocks
downward on Wall Street today.
The Dow Jones
industrial average dropped
nearly 212 points
to close just under 16205. The
Nasdaq fell
more than 146 points, and the
S&P 500 lost
35. For the week, the Dow was
down more than
a percent. The Nasdaq fell 5
percent, and
the S&P 500 lost 3 percent.
A 6.4-magnitude earthquake has
rocked southern
Taiwan. It was centered about 27
miles southeast
of Tainan and struck about six
miles underground.
Local media reported multiple
buildings had
collapsed in the city that is
home to nearly
two million people. There was no
immediate
word on casualties.
In Syria, pro-government forces
aided by Russian
airstrikes tightened their grip
around Aleppo.
They captured the town of
Ratyan, less than
15 miles away. A rebel commander
said the
northern Aleppo countryside has
now been totally
encircled.
Meanwhile, Turkey estimates
15,000 Syrians
have arrived at their border,
but it's not
clear how many will be let in.
Relief groups
have set up tents on the Syrian
side for temporary
shelter.
The United Nations' children's
agency, UNICEF,
reports that at least 200
million girls and
women around the world have been
subjected
to genital mutilation. That is
70,000 more
cases than in 2014. It
attributed the rise
to both population growth and
increased reporting.
Female genital mutilation occurs
in at least
30 countries. But half the
victims live in
Egypt, Ethiopia and Indonesia.
Twitter is cracking down on
accounts that
promote terrorist activity. The
company said
today that it's already
suspended more than
125,000 accounts, mostly linked
to the Islamic
State. It's also increasing the
staffing of
teams that review accounts
flagged for extremism,
so they can catch suspicious
users faster.
A United Nations human rights
panel ruled
today that WikiLeaks founder
Julian Assange
should be allowed to walk free.
The group
said that he's been arbitrarily
detained by
the British and Swedish
governments, who have
long sought to extradite Assange
to Sweden
to face rape charges that he's
denied. Assange
emerged onto the balcony of
Ecuador's embassy
in London, where he's taken
refuge since 2012,
to celebrate the panel's
findings.
JULIAN ASSANGE, Founder,
WikiLeaks: How sweet
it is. This is a victory that
cannot be denied.
It's a victory of historic
importance, not
just for me, for my family, for
my children,
but for the independence of the
U.N. system.
JUDY WOODRUFF: British's foreign
secretary,
Philip Hammond, repudiated the
U.N. ruling,
which is not legally binding.
PHILIP HAMMOND, British Foreign
Secretary:
Julian Assange is a fugitive
from justice.
He is hiding from justice in the
Ecuadorian
Embassy. He can come out onto
the pavement
anytime he chooses. He is not
being detained
by us, but he will have to face
justice in
Sweden if he chooses to do so.
And it is right that he
shouldn't be able
to escape justice. This is,
frankly, a ridiculous
finding by the working group,
and we reject
it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: London police
have said that
they will arrest Assange if he
tries to leave
the Ecuadorian Embassy. It's
unclear whether
the U.S. is also seeking his
arrest related
to WikiLeaks' release of
hundreds of thousands
of secret U.S. documents.
There will be no big dance
appearance for
the Louisville Cardinals this
year. The University
of Louisville announced a
self-imposed postseason
ban for its men's basketball
team today. It
comes as the NCAA is
investigating claims
that escorts were paid to dance
and have sex
with recruits and players. The
university's
president said a separate
internal investigation
revealed -- quote -- "that
violations had
occurred."
And former Apollo 14 astronaut
Edgar Mitchell
has died. Mitchell was a part of
the 1971
lunar mission, becoming the
sixth of only
12 people to ever walk on the
surface of the
moon. He died last evening in
Florida following
a short illness. Edgar Mitchell
was 85 years
old.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Brazil's
race against time to combat the
Zika virus;
Syrian refugees struggle to call
Lebanon home;
Mark Shields and David Brooks on
this week
in politics; psychology of
sports ahead of
Sunday's Super Bowl; plus, the
causes and
consequence of distrust in
government.
U.S. health officials put out
new guidance
today about the Zika virus. For
the first
time, they recommended that men
who have traveled
to an area with Zika should use
condoms if
they have sex with a pregnant
woman for the
entire duration of the
pregnancy. The CDC
also says those men may want to
consider abstaining
from sex with women who are
trying to get
pregnant.
While the disease is
overwhelmingly spread
by mosquitoes, questions about
three possible
cases of sexual transmission led
to these
new guidelines.
In Brazil, Zika has been found
in the saliva
and urine of two people. And
more than one
million people there are said to
be infected
with Zika.
Our science correspondent, Miles
O'Brien,
is covering the story. He joins
me now from
Recife, Brazil, where Carnival
celebrations
are beginning.
So, Miles, this is a country
that's hardest-hit.
It also happens to be you're
there at the
time of this big annual holiday.
MILES O'BRIEN: Yes, Judy. Here
we are in the
middle of this public health
crisis and this
celebration, this national
holiday begins
on this night, Carnival.
What's interesting about
Carnival is that
at the very core the philosophy
is, forget
your troubles and party like
there is no tomorrow.
That's how the Brazilians view
it and that's
why in most cases the party has
gone on.
I talked to a lot of public
health officials
and doctors and scientists who
have been involved
in this hurt for some action and
some way
to control the Zika outbreak,
and many of
them express misgivings about
it, frankly,
but the show is going on.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, Miles, we
know the Centers
for Disease Control said today
that the cooperation
with Brazil is getting better.
That's the
CDC here in the U.S. But they
also have some
expressed some frustration about
not getting
enough data from down this. What
do you know
about that?
MILES O'BRIEN: We heard a lot
about this when
we spoke to some of the
scientists on the
front lines here, some of the
epidemiologists
and the virologists who are
working on this
scientific riddle.
This is a virus that has
presented a whole
new problem for them, and it's a
virus, like
so many things these days, that
instantly
become a global problem. The
problem is, there
is legislation, there is law in
this land
which makes it all but
impossible for them
to share samples with their
colleagues in
Atlanta or Glasgow or elsewhere
In Europe.
And so they have been frustrated
by that inability
to share their data. Having said
that, in
a briefing today, the head of
the CDC, Tom
Frieden, said that is improving.
But it's
a reminder that when you're in a
situation
like this with a fast-moving
virus, it's time
to bring all kinds of borders
and privileges
and scientific prerogatives down
and try to
fight the problem.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Miles, for
the medical
profession, I know you're
talking to physicians
there, researchers. You were
saying this has
to be very frustrating for them,
that they
don't feel, you said, that they
have the tools
in the toolbox that they need.
MILES O'BRIEN: I spoke to a
gynecologist today
who's dealt with several mothers
who have
had to contend with this, and
she's so frustrated.
She said: "I feel like I'm in
the Stone Age.
I can see this coming, I stay
problem developing,
and I have no tools in my
toolbox to help
these women."
It's an unfortunate case. They
have got this
virus that came out of the blue,
and they
really don't have a way of
coping with it
right now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Miles, in
terms of the
science of it and dealing with
the mosquitoes
who are carrying this virus
around, what about
that front? Are they able to --
I mean, are
they able to project any kind of
precautions
that can be taken? Where are
they on that
front?
MILES O'BRIEN: Well, obviously,
they're telling
pregnant women to be very
careful and to guard
against being bitten by
mosquitoes. It's worth
mentioning that those are the
people. It's
the pregnant women and their
babies in utero
that are of concern.
When an adult gets bitten by a
mosquito and
gets Zika, four out of five
people don't even
know they have had it. So, part
of it is public
education. Part of it is going
through and
doing some spraying, which has
limited efficacy.
They have got 200,000 troops in
the military
knocking on doors, looking for
standing water,
but ultimately they're way
outnumbered by
the mosquitoes. We were in a lab
just the
other day where they're actually
genetically
engineering mosquitoes, male
mosquitoes, to
mate with females, creating
progeny which
will die very quickly.
And that kind of clever approach
is part of
putting some tools in the
toolbox to try to
control how mosquitoes are
carrying Zika.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, meantime,
finally, Miles,
warnings going out to women and
to men about
the dangers of this virus.
MILES O'BRIEN: You know, Judy,
it's really
a heartbreaking scenario, how
this cropped
up. It's dangerous and it caught
public health
officials by surprise.
Today, I was with a mother with
a 2-month-old
son who is drastically affected
by this microcephaly.
And it means a lifelong problem
of disability
and care for this now
2-month-old child of
hers. And so it's -- the danger
cannot be
understated for pregnant women.
And that set
against this Carnival offers up
quite a contrast
this year.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it's
heartbreaking. It's
frightening.
And, Miles, I know we look
forward to the
reporting that you're doing down
there. And
we will be having that in the
days to come.
Miles O'Brien, we thank you.
MILES O'BRIEN: You're welcome,
Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As we reported
earlier, a new
wave of refugees is being forced
from Syria
as the war rages in the north.
But west of Syria, Lebanon is
now hosting
more than one million Syrians.
Many live in
desperate conditions. Others are
looking toward
Europe. Some still dream of
home. But amid
the crisis, there is some good
fortune.
Special correspondent Jane
Ferguson reports
from Beirut.
JANE FERGUSON: Running a bakery
is not something
Abdul Halim is used to. Only a
few months
ago, he was destitute, just
another refugee
from Syria escaping deadly
violence threatening
his family.
His marriage broke down in Syria
and his wife
left him to look after their two
children.
He fled the war to neighboring
Lebanon and
found himself penniless,
struggling to survive
on the streets of Beirut as a
single father.
"I tried to look for work, but
no one would
give me a job because I had my
kids with me,"
he says. "I walked the streets
and saw there
were schools and a lot of
students, so I thought
the best thing I could do was to
sell pens.
I went and bought a box of pens.
And I left
my son at home. And I took my
daughter, who
was this small. And I would
carry her. What
could I do? There was nowhere I
could put
her."
What happened next was
extraordinary. Someone
saw Abdul Halim selling his pens
in the hot
summer sunshine, his daughter
Reem in his
arms, and posted this picture on
Twitter.
It went viral, and soon there
was a campaign
to raise money for him, using
the hashtag
#buypens. Its organizers hoped
to raise $5,000.
In the end, they got over
$190,000.
Now, with that money, he bought
a bakery,
sandwich shop and a small
restaurant, and
employs 20 men, all Syrian
refugees supporting
their families. His son even
helps out.
"My children's lives changed,"
he tells us.
"We were living in a room that
was uninhabitable.
But now we live in a house with
four rooms.
I have furnished it nicely. My
son goes to
school. My daughter is looked
after and is
learning. And I have three shops
and I'm working.
My life has changed totally."
Abdul Halim is extremely lucky.
Most Syrians
struggle to pay for the rising
cost of living
here on tiny wages. Until
recently, Ahmed
Kaju worked in the bakery. But
$10 a day didn't
pay the rent. He now feels he
must make a
desperate choice.
"I want to go to Germany,
because they say
the living is good and that they
want to help
the Syrians," he said. So, I
will go just
like everybody else, to Turkey
and from Turkey
to Greece.
In a boat?
AHMED KAJU, Refugee (through
translator):
Yes, in a boat to Greece, and
from there,
we will continue with everybody
else.
JANE FERGUSON: With your family?
AHMED KAJU (through translator):
With my family,
my son and my daughter.
JANE FERGUSON: But it's very
dangerous.
AHMED KAJU (through translator):
But I'm dying
here. I might as well die there.
It's the
same in the end. Let me die
trying.
JANE FERGUSON: We traveled
across town to
the impoverished neighborhood of
Bourj el-Barajneh,
where we met another Syrian
refugee family
hoping to make it to Europe
soon.
Jinan Jamal's husband survived
the dangerous
boat journey from Turkey four
months ago.
She stayed behind with their
three young boys.
Now in Germany, her husband is
trying to get
asylum for Jinan and the
children. Six months
pregnant and living on debt, she
is desperate
to join her husband.
"Honestly, I have no more
strength. I'm tired,"
she tells us. "Sometimes, I put
my kids to
bed and when they sleep, I look
at them and
I cry. I don't care about
myself. I care about
my kids and how they are living.
There is
nobody to help me. My parents
are dead. There
is nowhere I can go. All I want
to do is to
join my husband."
But life is even tougher for
refugees living
outside Beirut. Providing
crucial services
to many of them is the charity
Mercy Corps.
They took us to the Bekaa
Valley, where thousands
of Syrians scratch out a living
in the countryside
along Lebanon's border with
Syria.
People who cross over from Syria
here to try
to escape the fighting, who end
up living
in tents, that's because they
don't have any
money.
WOMAN: Yes, they don't have
money to rent
apartments.
JANE FERGUSON: Bitter snowstorms
make winter
the worst time of year to be a
refugee.
Without aid agencies like
yourselves, what
would happen to those people?
WOMAN: What would happen?
Without aid agencies,
I think that those people would
be not able
to live.
JANE FERGUSON: This is how most
Syrian refugees
survive, in overcrowded camps.
Some of the
families here have lived in
these canvas huts
for years, in the shadow of a
mountain range
that separates them from their
home country.
Many refugees live in camps like
this, just
groups of tents directed here on
farmland.
The conditions are absolutely
squalid. In
the summer here, it's hot and
dusty, and in
the winter, it's freezing cold
and absolutely
waterlogged.
Amina Hamadi shares this room
with her sister
and four children. A farmer from
Syria, she
wouldn't dream of going to
Europe, she tells
me. She hopes to return one day
to her old
life.
"There, everybody owned land. We
owned land,"
she says. "We lived off the
land. We planted
vegetables and we lived from
it."
Her husband died three years
ago, and now
the family relies on handouts
from the U.N.
It's bitterly cold in her tent,
despite the
small stove, but she is
resilient.
"A mountain can't move me," she
says. "I have
children that I have to raise. I
need to look
after them."
Her 6-year-old son, Ahmed, shows
us a drawing.
In it, his family are smiling
next to a house.
He says it is their home in
Syria. Millions
of Syrian children like Ahmed
have only ever
known war, and a hard life as
refugees.
The children are saying that
they don't get
to go to school because they
cannot afford
to get transport to the nearest
school. The
schools here are free, but they
can't get
there.
Syrians around the world each
tell different
stories of suffering,
resilience, and sometimes
hope. As the war drags on into
its fifth year,
they will likely have to
continue their lives
in exile.
Jane Ferguson, "PBS NewsHour,"
Beirut, Lebanon.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now more on
the race for
the White House.
As we heard, the Democrats
squared off on
the debate stage last night in
New Hampshire.
It was one of the most
contentious meetings
in the election cycle so far.
One of the sticking
points, how the candidates would
get things
done.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
I am not going to make promises
I can't keep.
I am not going to talk about big
ideas like
single-payer and then not level
with people
about how much it will cost.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
Now all of the ideas that I'm
talking about,
they are not radical ideas.
Doing -- making
public colleges and universities
tuition-free,
that exists in countries all
over the world,
used to exist in the United
States.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that brings
us to the analysis
of Shields and Brooks. That's
syndicated columnist
Mark Shields and New York Times
columnist
David Brooks.
Welcome, gentlemen.
So, this is the first time,
Mark, we have
seen the two of them, just the
two of them,
on the debate stage. What did
you make of
it?
MARK SHIELDS: I thought they
played their
roles exceedingly well. I mean,
you had the
battle-tested, experienced,
pragmatist concerned
with results against this fresh
new face,
74 years old, the outside
crusader with a
noble cause.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: And I thought each
of them kind
of made their respective case
well.
Obviously want to give a
shout-out, quite
honestly, to Chuck Todd and
Rachel Maddow,
who I thought did a great job of
moderating,
let them debate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sure.
MARK SHIELDS: Didn't have
artificial times
imposed.
I thought Hillary Clinton, if
you read the
transcript, I think she comes
across better
than she does in person. And
what is missing,
there's great factual command,
but there's
nothing inspirational or
aspirational about
her candidacy at this point. And
I think that's
missing.
Bernie is a lot of inspiration,
and he's excited.
Democrats are a glandular party.
They like
to love to fall in love. And an
awful lot
of them have fallen in love with
Bernie.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Glandular party?
(CROSSTALK)
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, I'm not going
to explore
that metaphor.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: You know, he does
have passion
and he has got policies. He's
the most predictable
candidate imaginable. He will
talk about Wall
Street, but then he will talk
about his policies,
free college education -- a
terrible idea,
by the way, good way to
subsidize the affluent
-- but, still, it's a policy.
The health thing is a policy.
The attack on
Wall Street, it is a policy.
What has -- Clinton,
of course she has policies. She
has got white
papers written somewhere in the
campaign,
but what is her main thing on
the -- when
she's talking? It's a process. I
can get things
done in a certain way. It's more
gradualist.
Well, who's marching to the flag
of gradualism?
And so I think, rhetorically,
there is a disadvantage
there, that he's got substance
and she's got
a process.
And, frankly, I do think, if
you're just a
random voter, that's not just
campaign style.
You look at her record in -- as
secretary
of state, well, she had a lot of
process,
but what vision did she actually
bring to
the job? This has always been
the knock on
her as secretary.
So, you got to think, well, is
this just part
of who she would be as
president? So, it's
not just style. It goes to
something substantive
as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: He went after
her, Mark, on
a number of things, but we heard
on Wall Street.
He said her Wall Street
connections, that
she's not enough of a
progressive. How did
she hold up, stand up to that?
MARK SHIELDS: I don't think she
has an answer,
Judy, quite honestly.
I mean, she showed her
independence. She has
defied him or challenged him to
show a vote
where she had changed her
policy, she had
changed because of her
contributions. But
it's a mystery to people close
to Hillary
Clinton, to her campaign, strong
supporters
of her, who was separated in
2000 from the
Clinton Foundation, from all
that outside
fund-raising, when she became a
United States
senator, went to the secretary
of state's
job, and all the way through
2013, she was
insulated and isolated from some
of the mishaps
or happenings that were going on
at the foundation
and allegations.
She comes out. Instead of
remaining pristine,
she plunged into that,
money-making, knowing
full well that it was going to
be raised,
if not -- and it remains a
mystery. And I
don't think she does have an
answer. I really
don't. And I think he's tapped
into something
that's very deep in the
Democratic Party.
The Democrats are generally
overwhelmingly
disappointed in Barack Obama and
Eric Holder,
that nobody, for the millions of
people who
lost their homes in the mortgage
crisis and
the banks, that nobody has ever
been held
accountable.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you think
she deals
with this Wall Street issue?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes. Well, early
in the week,
she dealt with it extremely
poorly. That's
kind of the money they offered
me, so I took
it. So, that wasn't good, and
scarcely better
in the debate.
And so she has to have some
answer. They're
going to ask her to release the
transcripts
of the remarks. I guarantee you
or I strongly
suspect she will never do that,
because she
probably said some nice things
about the audience
who were paying her so much
money. I do not
believe it has influenced her
votes. So I
think she's right about that.
But it doesn't look good. The
weird thing
about the Democratic Party now
is that Wall
Street has become the center of
evil in the
country. Now, I didn't like what
happened
in 2008. I think that fees these
hedge funds
charge are crazy, especially
given their performance.
But the problems of the middle
class are caused
by technological change and
globalization.
They're not primarily caused by
Wall Street.
And creating this boogeyman, as
Sanders does,
as Wall Street, that is the
wrong problem.
And he's creating a false
narrative, which
just is an economic reality of
why we have
wage stagnation and inequality
and all the
rest.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Mark, what
about him going
after her, we have heard
different iterations
of this, that she's just not
truly progressive
enough, that she's part of
the...
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, I don't think
that a lot
of Democrats spend time about
arguing whether
you're progressive or
un-progressive or whatever.
She has a record of -- the thing
is that,
to some degree, she's almost
like the incumbent,
Judy. For 25 years, she's been
going to New
Hampshire. But her
identification with children's
issues, family issues is deep
and strong.
But I really do think that this
is -- David
makes the case on technological
change and
so forth. But, I mean, I think
the reaction
to the mortgage crisis was, this
is a terrible
thing. We must find the people
who did it
and give them billions of
dollars.
I mean, that was basically the
response. And
I think there is a -- just a
simmering anger
that remains presently in the
electorate that
he has tied in to. The advantage
he has is
that he knows exactly what he
believes. He
has said the said thing for so
long. He's
never going to be tripped up. I
mean, he's
totally consistent.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And she goes
after him, as
we heard, David, for just having
these pie-in-the-sky
ideas that he can never carry
out.
DAVID BROOKS: Well, I think
she's right about
that. I think they're
unaffordable.
The Washington Post had a good
editorial on
how unaffordable a lot of these
things are.
And unless he can sweep the
House of Representatives
and get 60 votes in the Senate,
he has no
implementation strategy.
Now, does she have one? That's
an interesting
question. You could argue that
maybe. But
I'm not sure she has a better
implementation
strategy anyway either. It's not
as if the
Clintons are non-polarizing.
They are polarizing
figures.
But she surely has a better shot
of an implementation
strategy than Bernie Sanders or
Ted Cruz.
I mean, it's tough to hear any
of these candidates
give you a plausible story about
how their
agendas could possibly get
passed in this
climate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let's talk about
the Republicans.
Coming out of Iowa, Mark, Ted
Cruz gets a
big lift, but it is said that
New Hampshire
is not great political territory
for him.
MARK SHIELDS: No. One-third as
many New Hampshire
voters are evangelical voters,
self-identified,
as there are in Iowa. In other
words, there
are three times as large a
percentage in Iowa.
And New Hampshire is a -- call
it non-religious,
irreligious. Religion doesn't
play a central
role. And I think he's been on
the defensive
ever since Iowa because of the
dirty tricks,
or whatever you want to call
them, toward
Ben Carson. And somebody that,
as a part of
his basic speech, says we must
raise up the
body of Christ in his rallying
cry, I mean,
this raises a charge of a little
hypocrisy
or inconsistency.
I will be fascinated to see if
Ben Carson
in Saturday night's debate uses
his time to
reprimand and censure Ted Cruz
and the tactics
he sued. So, Cruz has now just
said they're
not going to spend more time and
effort and
resources in New Hampshire.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Ted Cruz, and
then we look
at Donald Trump, who, David, was
leading in
Iowa, came in a pretty distant
-- well, four
or five points behind. The air
came out of
some of that balloon. Where does
he go next?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
Well, he, of course, missed the
day today
because he can't afford to stay
in New Hampshire,
apparently. He can't afford the
hotels there
and has to stay at home in New
York.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: He's magnifying, I
think, his
weaknesses.
Some of the things he said and
some of the
things he's tweeted, saying I
actually would
have won Iowa, but Cruz cheated,
that's not
-- that's unnerving. That's not
the way you
react to a defeat. And so I
think if people
had any doubts about his
stability, as Lisa
said, with the nuclear trigger,
this sort
of magnifies it.
With Cruz, we saw the guy has an
iron wall
around him. He has extremely
conservative
voters locked down. But it's
very hard for
him to reach out to anybody
else. There is
just an iron wall separating him
from moderate
voters, from other kinds of
Republicans.
And so, if you look at the
post-Iowa polls
in New Hampshire, you see Cruz
dipping a little
-- I mean, Trump dipping a
little, Rubio rising
a lot, so he now looks like the
alternative,
and then Cruz getting no bounce
because of
that wall around him.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I want to ask
you about
Rubio in a minute.
But, Mark, do I hear you -- both
of you saying
that Trump really -- it's hard
for Trump to
find some kind of footing in New
Hampshire?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, I mean, he's
enjoyed a
large lead in all the public
opinion polls
up until now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes.
MARK SHIELDS: I don't know,
Judy.
Someone who predicates it on,
I'm a winner
and the people on the other side
are losers,
and then doesn't win, that's
what he was selling,
there was something special
about him. And
I don't know. I think the debate
Saturday
night, not to put all the --
everything into
that, but I think it's going to
be a test
of him and policies.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tomorrow night.
MARK SHIELDS: I mean, for
example, in an interview
with Anderson Cooper, he said we
-- the United
States gave Iran $150 billion.
I mean, now, the United States
didn't give
Iran. That was -- it was Iran's
money, its
assets that had been frozen. But
his real
holes on policy matters, I
think, are a real
problem for him. And, you know,
I don't know.
If Rubio were to finish first in
New Hampshire,
I think it basically propels him
in a remarkable
fashion.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, what is
this magic, David,
that Rubio seems to have caught?
And, by the way, we have got
these other three
well-known establishment
candidates, John
Kasich, Chris Christie, Jeb
Bush, who finished
way back in Iowa, but are still
trying really
hard to show up in New
Hampshire.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
They're trying hard, but what
happened, what
the Iowa result has done is
given Rubio some
distance between him and the
others. And so
he seems like the alternative.
And I think,
for the other three, if they
don't tie or
beat him, then I don't see any
justification
for their continued campaigns,
which is not
how they're talking, but I think
that's just
the reality.
Rubio has gotten a nice bump.
He's a good
communicator. And the important
thing is,
he's acceptable to all parts of
the party.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
DAVID BROOKS: And so he ran --
we forget,
he ran as a Tea Party candidate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
DAVID BROOKS: And so -- but now
he's seen
as Mr. Moderate.
But he's -- I think he's the
77th most -- he's
in the 77th percentile of
conservatism in
the Republican Congress, so he's
more conservative
than the average congressional
Republican,
which is -- means he's pretty
conservative.
But he's acceptable to all
sides. He has a
nice disposition. We will see,
as Mark says,
in the debate, when he gets
attacked from
all quarters, how he handles it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Forty-five
seconds, Mark. What
about these other -- these four,
Rubio, but
the other three who are trying
to catch up?
MARK SHIELDS: Sure.
Rubio is the closest thing to
Jimmy Carter
in 1976 I have seen, in the
sense that he's
an incredibly disciplined
candidate, just
as Carter was. He's on message.
He's running
on biography. And he's broadly
acceptable
to all the elements in his own
party. And
he also -- there is implicit
electability,
and that -- which is Bernie
Sanders' Achilles'
heel at this point, quite
honestly.
The others, I mean, this is it.
You remember
Jon Huntsman made his fight in
2012. Unless
one of them breaks through and
almost closes
to the third or fourth, I don't
think any
of them expects to be second at
this point.
And I think it's going to be
tough to go on,
especially if Rubio gets the
bounce.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, I remember
one of these
people at the table -- maybe
both of you -- speaking
the name Rubio even some time
ago.
We will see. Just a few nights
to go, New
Hampshire, and both of you are
going to be
with us Tuesday night.
Thank you, David Brooks, Mark
Shields.
MARK SHIELDS: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Next, in case
you're been asleep,
this is Super Bowl weekend. The
heavily favored
Carolina Panthers will face off
against the
Denver Broncos on Sunday for
football's biggest
prize.
Hari Sreenivasan has our story.
HARI SREENIVASAN: A TV audience
of well over
100 million is expected to tune
in to see
the Carolina Panthers
quarterback Cam Newton
go head-to-head with sentimental
favorite
Peyton Manning leading the
Denver Broncos.
Both teams spent this week in
preparations.
The game caps a season of big
rivalries, bigger
setbacks and some surprise
comebacks.
In a new book, "This Is Your
Brain on Sports,"
"Sports Illustrated"'s executive
editor, Jon
Wertheim, along with co-author
Sam Sommers
of Tufts University, explore the
psychology
and behavior of sports teams and
their fans.
For a closer look, Jon Wertheim
joins me now.
So, "This Is Your Brain on
Sports," why the
book?
JON WERTHEIM, Author, "This Is
Your Brain
on Sports": We all love sports.
There is so much that goes on in
sports, it
seems irrational or
counterintuitive. And
we dismiss that these are just
sort of -- these
are the rules of the road of
sports. And we
wanted to dig a little and say,
what really
explains -- what are the
underpinnings, everything
from the crazy T-shirt cannon
that we go crazy
about, to the fact that teams
seem to elevate
when there's a rivalry?
What is really going on here?
What is the
human behavior? What is the
psychology? What
is going on here?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Let's talk a
little bit
about rivalries.
The likelihood is that this
might be one of
Peyton Manning's last days. So,
it's not a
Peyton vs. Cam rivalry. But,
sometimes, when
two teams get together at the
Super Bowl,
it's a much bigger deal for
entire cities
and fans. Why is that?
JON WERTHEIM: Rivalry is one of
these essential
elements of sports.
And what the research says is
that there really
is a difference in performance a
run-of-the-mill
game vs. a rivalry team.
Physiologically,
athletes in a rivalry game,
testosterone levels
are different. Saliva levels are
different.
These scores tend to be closer.
And this is true in life too.
There are all
sorts of studies. You put kids
alone to take
the SAT and then you put them in
a room with
other kids, and they will score
better when
there are other kids in the
room.
When we bid on eBay, if it's
just us, we bid
one way. If we have a rival, it
may only be
a code name, an eBay sign-in
name, our bidding
patterns change. So, rivalry
really does -- it's
sort of hyper-competition that
really changes
performance.
HARI SREENIVASAN: One of the
elements of pressure
that a lot of people don't think
about during
the Super Bowl is the pressure
that is on
the coaches on the sidelines.
And you kind
of point out that the Denver
coach is a relatively
new one. The one before that
Denver coach
was a pretty darn good one, too.
JON WERTHEIM: In the NFL,
especially, Hari,
you have this monstrous
turnover. About three
years is the average tenure for
a coach. Remember,
they're only playing 16 games,
so not a lot
of data points.
Ron Rivera, Carolina coach, five
years, that
puts him the top quartile for
longevity. And
we say, why is this? Why is
there this turnover
of coaches? And what we think is
at play is
the action bias, that the
owners, your team
is 8-8, and the fans are saying
make a change,
you're 9-7.
And the owners say, you know
what? We have
got to do something. We have got
to make it
look like we care. And, again,
this is human
behavior. We do this all the
time. This is
why we're too quick to buy and
sell stocks.
This is why physicians sort of
offer too many
tests.
The moral of the story is sort
of don't just
-- stand there, don't just do
something. But
what we see is that owners are
very quick
on the trigger and -- exactly.
Denver has
a first-year coach in Gary
Kubiak.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Right. And you
said also
that players don't necessarily
-- great players
don't necessarily make good
coaches.
JON WERTHEIM: Right.
And it's funny. Ron Rivera and
Gary Kubiak
were both NFL players, but they
were not -- these
are not Pro Bowlers, just sort
of serviceable
players. And you look at the
best athletes
in sports, whether it's Michael
Jordan, or
whether it's Wayne Gretzky, not
great careers
as coaches and assessors of
talent.
Well, why is that? And what we
discovered
is there's something called the
curse of expertise.
And you get so good at a task,
you skip steps,
and part of the problem with
that is, it becomes
very hard to articulate what's
going on.
So, Michael Jordan was a
brilliant basketball
player, but he skipped steps to
get there.
And when it came time to
instruct people,
not great idea for a coach. The
same way maybe
your kid plays the violin, the
best virtuoso
in the world is probably not the
best violin
teacher.
What we see in sports is that
like guys like
Gary Kubiak and Ron Rivera, who
they played,
they didn't pull these guys off
the street,
but they weren't at that top
echelon. They're
actually better able to
articulate what's
going on.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And you
mentioned that Jimmy
Connors and Andy Roddick, that
was one of
those combinations where he
couldn't figure
out how to tell him to improve
his game.
JON WERTHEIM: No, the great
Jimmy Connors,
one of the most successful
tennis players
ever, and as a coach, it was
fight harder,
hit the ball.
For Andy Roddick's next coach,
he ended up
going down a level, player Larry
Stefanki,
much less accomplished player
than Jimmy Connors.
He saw the game completely
differently. And,
again, he wasn't afflicted by
this curse of
expertise.
HARI SREENIVASAN: OK. And there
is this other
thing in the book, and I want to
get to it,
is, are quarterbacks better
looking on average?
JON WERTHEIM: Great archetype of
sports, right?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Why is that?
JON WERTHEIM: No, the
quarterbacks, whether
it's Tom Brady and Cam Newton,
for that matter,
at the highest level, or whether
it's the
high school quarterback who
dates the cheerleader,
we have this idea in our head
that the quarterbacks
are the best looking guys.
And we actually devised an
experiment. My
collaborator, Sam Sommers,
experimental psychologist,
devised an experiment, where we
actually tested
that and sort of in a blind
taste test assessed
the looks of different players
by positions.
And quarterbacks actually ranked
towards the
bottom.
So why is it we have this
archetype of quarterback
as good looking? And there are a
lot of factors,
but we think some of it is,
we're conflating
other qualities, right? This is
the face of
the franchise. This is the
leader. This is
one of the most important
positions in sports.
And what we do, it's called the
halo effect,
where we have qualities that we
like in someone
and we conflate all sorts of
other qualities.
So, we like Peyton Manning, and
suddenly he
becomes good looking in our
eyes.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right, Jon
Wertheim,
co-author, along with Sam
Sommers. The book
is called "This Is Your Brain on
Sports."
Thanks so much.
JON WERTHEIM: Thanks, Hari. It
was fun.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight,
we pause for
a "PBS NewsHour" essay.
Jeff Greenfield is a seasoned
political journalist
and author, and he shares his
belief about
the end of trust by Americans in
this country's
institutions.
Greenfield has titled his essay
"In Nothing
We Trust."
JEFF GREENFIELD, Journalist:
It's not exactly
breaking news that we're
entering this political
high season in the winter of our
discontent.
The polls and the political
rhetoric speak
to a mood of anger, distrust,
even outright
betrayal. But take a look beyond
the political
realm, and you will find
something that runs
longer than the current
campaign, and deeper
than politics.
The unhappy fact is that
Americans' trust
in just about all our
institutions has been
in a long, almost unbroken
decline. Our trust
in government? A Pew Research
poll last November
found that only 19 percent of us
trusted the
government to do what was right
all or most
of the time. That's close to an
historic low.
But the real story here is how
long that distrust
has been festering. Go back to
1964, when
the U.S. was in the midst of a
long period
of economic growth, when the
Cold War was
easing, when a major civil
rights bill had
just been passed.
Back then, 77 percent trusted
the government
to do the right thing all or
most of the time.
A decade later, after a divisive
war, racial
and generational unrest, a
president driven
from office in scandal, the
number had dropped
to 36 percent. And in the four
decades since,
it has never hit 50 percent, not
even in the
surge of patriotism after 9/11.
That's about 40 years' worth of
alienation
from the government of, by and
for people.
Well, OK, but that's the
government. We are
a nation born in revolt, with a
permanent
skepticism about our leaders.
But now look
at our feelings about other
major institutions,
and the picture, painted by a
series of Gallup
surveys going back decades,
finds a disturbingly
similar pattern.
Our churches? Two-thirds of us
had a lot of
trust in our religious
institutions back in
1973. Now barely 42 percent do.
Banks? Trust
has gone from 60 percent back in
1979 to 28
percent now. Our public schools?
More than
half were trusting at the end of
the '70s.
Barely three in 10 are today.
Organized labor? Big business?
The medical
system? The presidency? All get
low grades.
And before you ask, 21 percent
profess a lot
of faith in television news,
less than half
the percentage that did so
little more than
20 years ago.
Other than the military, the
police, and small
business, no institution
commands the trust
of a majority of us, and even
those are less
trusted than they once were.
Well, the question is, why? One
obvious answer,
there's good reason for this
mistrust. How
confident should we be in banks
after the
financial meltdown, in our
public schools,
given the woeful marks our
students get compared
with other nations, in our
religious leaders,
given the criminal sexual
behavior of those
who've spoken in God's name?
But we're also living in a less
innocent time.
The press was strictly
controlled in World
War II. The failures, strategic
and moral,
in places like Iraq, are on full
display.
The private lives of
politicians, once carefully
concealed, are now matters of
public speculation.
Movies that celebrated heroes of
the church
or finance now tell very
different stories
of greed and sin. And the media
messengers
who show us the feet of clay on
those that
stand on the pedestals, well,
they are increasingly
seen as carriers of a partisan
agenda, or
guilty of their own failures.
But, deserved or not, the
lengthy disaffection
that so many feel about so many
important
parts of our national life
clearly puts a
heavy burden on anyone asking
for the trust
of the citizenry. It may,
indeed, reward those
who seek power, not by offering
to ease that
disaffection, but to feed it.
And it's worth asking, how does
a nation thrive
when, year after year, our motto
is, in nothing
we trust?
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you can find
more of our
essays online at
PBS.org/NewsHour.
Also on the "NewsHour" online
right now, there's
a museum being built underwater
off the Canary
Islands. Soon, divers will be
able to visit
the ghostly sculptures, which
offer a stark
reminder of Europe's refugee
crisis and, the
artist hopes, inspires viewers
to protect
our oceans. All that and more is
on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And a reminder about some
upcoming programs
from our PBS colleagues.
Gwen Ifill is preparing for
"Washington Week,"
which airs later this evening.
Here's a preview:
GWEN IFILL: Insults, polls,
voters, candidates.
The presidential race turns full
soap opera.
We will provide your best Iowa
roundup, plus
New Hampshire preview, with
reports on the
ground and in the studio.
That's later tonight on
"Washington Week"
-- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And on "PBS
NewsHour Weekend"
Saturday: beyond Iowa and New
Hampshire, how
states' complex delegate rules
may determine
who wins the primary. That's
tomorrow night
on "PBS NewsHour Weekend."
And we will be back right here
on Monday,
with the latest on the race for
the White
House.
Plus, mark your calendar: On
Thursday night,
Gwen and I will moderate a
Democratic presidential
debate between Hillary Clinton
and Bernie
Sanders from the University of
Wisconsin-Milwaukee.
That's Thursday at 9:00 p.m.
Eastern.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
Have a great weekend. Thank you,
and good
night.